chore: 25110 Added reference doc for the signed snapshot format (#25120)
hashgraph/hedera-services: platform-sdk/docs/core/signed-state-snapshot-spec.md

```
<stateConfig.savedStateDirectory>/<mainClassName>/<selfId>/<swirldName>/<round>/
```

Example: `data/saved/com.hedera.services.ServicesMain/0/123/4242`.

### 1.1 Atomic write

`SignedStateFileWriter.writeSignedStateToDisk` wraps the whole directory build
inside `FileUtils.executeAndRename`, which:

1. Creates a fresh temporary directory under `swirlds-tmp/` (from `TemporaryFileConfig`).
2. Runs the full `writeSignedStateFilesToDirectory` operation there.
3. Calls `Files.move(tmp, finalRoundDir, ATOMIC_MOVE)`.

Readers therefore never observe a half-built round directory; if the process is
killed mid-write, the temp directory is orphaned (and cleaned up) without
affecting `saved/…/<round>/`.

### 1.2 Round-directory layout

```
<round>/
├── stateMetadata.txt                ← SavedStateMetadata (human-readable k/v)
├── hashInfo.txt                     ← state-hash mnemonic + info string
├── currentRoster.json               ← active Roster as PBJ JSON
├── signatureSet.pbj                 ← SigSet (PBJ binary)
├── settingsUsed.txt                 ← effective Configuration dump
├── data/
│   └── state/                      ← MerkleDb snapshot (see §3)

> │       ├── table_metadata.pbj

Reviewer: All of these details should be in the other doc

Author: Moved this to another doc.

`writeSignedStateFilesToDirectory` explicitly notes this step is a temporary
arrangement (#23415); PCES file format is out of scope for this document.

---

## 5. Consolidated protobuf / field reference

All schemas required to parse a signed snapshot, in one place.

**`hapi/hedera-protobuf-java-api/src/main/proto/platform/state/platform_state.proto`**

```proto
message SigSet {
  repeated NodeIdSignaturePair nodeIdSignaturePairs = 1;
}
message NodeIdSignaturePair {
  int64 nodeId         = 1;
  int32 signatureType  = 2;   // 0=RSA, 1=ED25519, 2=ECDSA_SECP256K1
  bytes signatureBytes = 3;
}
```

**`hapi/…/services/state/roster/roster.proto`** (summarized):

```proto
message Roster       { repeated RosterEntry rosterEntries = 1; }
message RosterEntry  {
  uint64 node_id                = 1;
  uint64 weight                 = 2;
  bytes  gossip_ca_certificate  = 3;
  repeated proto.ServiceEndpoint gossip_endpoint = 5;
}
```

See more details about proto definition in the [State snapshot spec field reference](../../swirlds-state-api/docs/state-snapshot-spec.md#consolidated-protobuf--field-reference).

## 6. Read path summary

`SignedStateFileReader.readStateFile` mirrors the writer:

> 1. `stateLifecycleManager.loadSnapshot(stateDir)`

Reviewer: I think this section should be made agnostic to state api internals

Author: I came to the conclusion that this section is redundant.

> # Signed State Snapshot On-Disk Representation

Reviewer: This document contains a great deal of detail that is owned by different groups. Perhaps it should be two different documents - one for the top level state files that the consensus layer chooses to write, and a second one for all the snapshot internal details. They could be linked together for easy navigation if the reader cares about both. It supports the idea that the State API is truly a library that does its own thing.

Author: okay, fair enough. I'll split the document in two.

Author: Done

This document describes the exact on-disk layout and binary formats produced by

> `SignedStateFileWriter.writeSignedStateToDisk` — the entry point used by the platform

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
`SignedStateFileWriter.writeSignedStateToDisk` — the entry point used by the consensus layer
```

whenever a signed state is persisted for a round (periodic snapshot, freeze state,
state dump). It consolidates every wire-level definition the reader needs,
whether declared in a `.proto` file or in Java via PBJ `FieldDefinition` constants.

> > **Source anchors.** `SignedStateFileWriter`, `SignedStateFilePath`,

Reviewer: nit - i'm not sure how useful it is to include these classes, and they can get out of date easily. Just a thought - feel free to resolve with no change.

Author: It will not be particularly useful for Nana, but I can easily imagine that this information could be useful for someone who has just joined the consensus team or simply wants to refresh their memory about snapshot creation.

Author: I removed it after all.

> `SignedStateFileUtils`, `SavedStateMetadata[Field]` (platform-core);
> `VirtualMap`, `VirtualMapMetadata`, `VirtualLeafBytes`, `VirtualHashChunk`
> (virtualmap); `MerkleDbDataSource`, `MerkleDbPaths`, `MerkleDbDataSourceBuilder`,
> `DataFileCollection`, `DataFileMetadata`, `DataFileCommon`, `HalfDiskHashMap`,
> `Bucket`, `AbstractLongList` (merkledb); `platform_state.proto`,
> `virtual_map_state.proto`, `roster.proto`, `bucket.proto` (hapi / merkledb proto).

---

## 1. Top-level directory

`SignedStateFilePath` computes the round directory as:

```

> <stateConfig.savedStateDirectory>/<mainClassName>/<selfId>/<swirldName>/<round>/

Reviewer: If you want to include the configuration string used in `settings.txt`, it should be `state.savedStateDirectory`.

Author: Not sure if I understand the comment. `settingsUsed.txt` is described [here ](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-consensus-node/pull/25120/changes/BASE..45ff63b0668c2514d5c5ac91252e0211a22260d7#diff-16a74eddc82e28da87fc31fba77c886633d3a0e6ecf336ab552ef9684b01f884R165) and in `Round-directory files` chapter.

Reviewer: this line says "stateConfig.savedStateDirectory" - what is the "stateConfig" part of it?

Author: Ah, I see. It means that we we take a property of `StateCommonConfig stateConfig.savedStateDirectory` and use it here. I'll remove the prefix, it looks a bit confusing

  bytes signatureBytes = 3;
}
```

### 2.5 `settingsUsed.txt`

Produced by `PlatformConfigUtils.writeSettingsUsed(directory, configuration)`:
a dump of every effective configuration property resolved for this run. Format
is a human-readable `key=value` listing (not consumed programmatically by the
platform — purely diagnostic).

---

## 3. State data sub-tree: `data/<vm-label>/`

Produced by:

```
StateLifecycleManager.createSnapshot
  → VirtualMapStateLifecycleManager.createSnapshot
    → VirtualMap.createSnapshot(outputDirectory)
      → MerkleDbDataSourceBuilder.snapshot(outputDirectory, dataSource)
        → MerkleDbDataSource.snapshot(snapshotDbPaths)
```

`MerkleDbDataSource.snapshot` runs six parallel tasks against a `MerkleDbPaths`
rooted at `data/<vm-label>/`:

|       Task        |                           Writes                           |
|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| metadata          | `table_metadata.pbj`                                       |
| idToDiskLocation… | `idToDiskLocationHashChunks.ll` (off-heap LongList flush)  |

> | pathToDiskLocat…  | `pathToDiskLocationLeafNodes.ll` (off-heap LongList flush) |

Reviewer 2: Off-heap or not depends on a config, right?

Author: Yes, fair enough. I'll remove "off-heap".

Author: Fixed
